# Fast protection system for high current LIA based on CRIO

YE Yi，LI Zetong，YANG Xinglin，JIANG Xiaoguo，JING Xiaobing，CHEN Nan，LIU Bangliang， ZANG Zongyang，LI Yue，JIANG Wei*

(Institute of Fluid Physics ， China Academy of Engineering Physics ， Mianyang Sichuan 621999 ， China)

Abstract： In high-current accelerators, anomalies in the Marx self-excitation of the pulsed-power system and in the loading of the magnet-excitation power-supply can degrade experimental quality or even cause the experiment to fail. A machine-protection system is presented, which is built around a Compact Reconfigurable Input/Output(CRIO) controller that continuously monitors Marx discharges and magnet-power-supply loading to provide fast machine protection. It simultaneously communicate with the accelerator's central control system, which is based on the Experimental Physics and Industrial Control System(EPICS) architecture. A Field Programmable Gate Array(FPGA) module inside the CRIO guarantees the response speed of the fast-protection logic, and a Real-Time(RT) module acts as an Input/ Output Controller(IOC) within the EPICS framework, subscribing to and publishing EPICS process variables to achieve seamless integration across heterogeneous platforms. The system exhibits strong immunity to interference; since commissioning it has operated reliably in the accelerator's complex electromagnetic environment, significantly improving the experimental reliability.

Keywords： accelerator； Experimental Physics and Industrial Control System(EPICS)； fastprotection system；Compact Reconfigurable I/O(CRIO)；Field Programmable Gate Array(FPGA)；Input/Output Controller(IOC)

紧凑型可重配置输入输出控制器(CRIO)是一款小巧且坚固的工业化控制和采集嵌入式平台，包含实时控制器和可编程的现场可编程门阵列(FPGA)芯片。采用可重新配置的I/O(Input/Output)、可重复编程的FPGA技术，

实现真正的并行运行性、高确定性和可自定义功能，同时支持可热插拔的工业级I/O模块。CRIO由于其坚固性、稳定性、开放性、实时性等特点，广泛用于车载、机载、舰艇、航空航天等各种复杂以及较恶劣环境的工业现场环境。我国的强流加速器机器快保护系统，主要针对加速器运行异常或发生某些故障时，根据仪器设备提供的报警信号和状态信息，可靠、快速对装置进行保护，切断实验触发链路，保护人身和产品的安全[1-2]。因此机器快保护系统要求实时响应速度需优于ms级，能够在加速器高电压强电流的复杂电磁环境下可靠动作，同时需要与采用实验物理和工业控制系统(EPICS)架构的中央控制系统进行通信。本文阐述了采用CRIO系统实现强流加速器机器快保护设计，以及CRIO系统作为EPICS机构中IOC组件的实现技术。